in this lesson we're going to look at
the benefits and usage of core
networking resources this is looking at
that assessed skill about the benefits
and usage of virtual networks vpn
gateway virtual network peering and
express
when i think about networking in azure
remember we have those idea of
boundaries
i can think about that i have a certain
subscription
and remember that subscription can use a
huge amount of different regions
but certainly within that particular
subscription
when i deploy many types of resources
they have to go to a specific region
and that's exactly the case for a
virtual network so within that
subscription i'm going to pick a certain
region
and those are the boundaries when i
create this idea of a virtual network so
i create a virtual network resource
so that virtual network resource exists
in a specific subscription so i cannot
span subscriptions and exist in a
specific region it cannot span regions
so this idea of this
virtual network
is really a core building block
now it's defined as a minimum
one set of ipv4
addresses
and we talked about the idea of a
sidearm range now that's outside the
scope of this video
but it's at least one ipv4 sideart range
now typically you're going to use
so the whole point of rfc 1918
is it's a set of ip addresses that are
designed to be used on internal networks
it will not route over the internet we
run out of ipv4 addresses so this was
created so that every company could use
this same range internally
and then translate that ip to
one or two public ipv4 addresses using
network address translation so this is
kind of this idea of ten slash eight
one seven two dot
sixteen slash twelve
or one nine two
dot one six eight
sixteen and
if you've used ipv4 these will make
sense
if not it's really just defining what
the ip address starts with what's part
of the host
network address and then which part is
the host so you're commonly going to see
in your house buddy right now you're
probably one of these address ranges
because they're reserved for internal
use
so i'm going to have one or more of
these defined for my virtual network
optionally
i can also add ipv6
sider ranges but you don't have to do
that
so that defines what is the virtual
network and then
i create virtual subnets so just like we
would in a real physical network i
divide it up
into one or more subnets
so this could be kind of
subnet one
i have a subnet 2
subnet 3 etc
and each one of these is going to be a
portion of that ip space that i defined
as the virtual network
so this for example could be 10.0.1
slash 24 that might be 10.10.0.2
such 24
10.0.3.24
it's some portion if i'd picked this or
a portion of that
for my virtual network
now remember
that idea of availability zones
different physical
buildings within a certain region
both the virtual network and subnets
span those availability zones if i think
of that idea of zone redundancy these
are not pinned to any particular
availability zone so if my region does
have availability zones
let's say kind of there's an az1
an az2 and an az3
both the subnet and the v-net span those
i.e i can put resources in the same
subnet some of them in az1 some in az2
some az3 it does not matter all of the
subnets all the v-nets are available in
any az within that particular region
and then what i do next is i just
attach resources to a particular subnet
now we commonly draw it as the idea that
hey i'm in putting a vm
in this subnet that's not really
accurate what actually happens is that
vm
has a network interface card attached to
it which
attaches to a particular subnet that's
really what happens behind the scenes
but to all intents and purposes we're
putting a vm in a particular subnet the
idea of subnet 2
subnet 3.
when i think about what size subnet do i
need
any subnet i create i pick a certain
range so if i pick this idea of a 24
well then there's eight bits available
for the host
so i think oh there's
256 usable ip addresses
azure you always lose five ips for every
subnet
you always lose the all zeroes or ones
for kind of the network address and
broadcast and then azure uses one for
the gateway and two for dns so if i'm
ever sizing a subnet remember you always
lose five
for any virtual network you create
if i was to jump over for a second
and if we just go and look at our
virtual networks
if i look at my test vena over here
and look at subnets you can see i've
created a whole bunch of different
subnets
but all of them if you look
so i got 192.168.1.
notice i'm not using 24 for this one
but
these are all empty there's no resources
actually connected to this
virtual network at all it's completely
empty
but
i'm using hey that 192168 address space
for the virtual network notice i could
add additional ones
but for the subnets look at the
available ips
it should be 256 in total
but what i actually have available is
251.
you're always losing five two you always
lose just for the regular protocol all
zeroes or ones but you lose an
additional three
for the gateway and then two for dns so
just remember if you're ever trying to
size up you're trying to work out what
size should it be
we always lose five
on every subnet
now these are all private ip addresses
technically you don't have to use rfc
1918 i could bring any ip range i wanted
even if i brought an ip range that was
publicly routable it would not be
publicly routable
naip space is a private ip within azure
if i want to make a service available
to the internet so if i think about out
here we have the internet
well what we have to add is a public ip
resource this is its own resource
so i'd create a public ip and then
either attach it to a virtual machine or
more specifically the ip configuration
of a virtual machine
or more commonly we'd create something
like a load balancer
and then that load balancer would attach
to the public ip for its front end
and on the back end it would connect to
virtual machines to offer the service so
if i want to offer a service to the
internet i have to create something to
make it available
there
but regular resources can go out to the
internet
azure just does that for us if it had
its own public ips behind a load
balancer it will use that if not it will
just create a pseudo ip to use for
outbound ipv4 so just understand by
default there is ipv4 internet
connectivity
now what about that's av net what about
if i had another v-net
what about if maybe i had
another region i was using well remember
a region is a boundary for a v-net so if
i wanted to use another region
let's say there's an idea of kind of a
region two
or maybe it was a different subscription
whatever the reason
i have another virtual network i have a
second one
now super important point
when i pick this ip space for my virtual
network
make sure it does not overlap with
another virtual network it could be
overlapping with an ipv4 address space
or v6 on premises or another v-net that
would be a very bad thing because then
they won't be able to connect
so make sure when i'm picking my address
space i pick a unique address space so
it's not currently being used anywhere
because i may want to connect them in
the future so let's say for example in
this example here for this virtual
network let's say i actually used
10.0
which is why these are 10.0. something
for the subnet so this v-net maybe i use
10.1
16.
so they're not overlapping
this could be in a different region it
could be in the same region it could be
in a different subscription same
subscription it doesn't matter
i can do something called peering
so when i peer them
i'm now enabling connectivity between
those virtual networks it's using the
azure backbone it's not going out to the
internet or anything like that so i can
do global v-net peering either in
different regions or just re-net peering
if they're in the same region but they
can span different regions they can span
different subscriptions they can span
even different azure ad tenants that
those subscriptions actually trust so if
i need to connect v-nets together the
best option is to use peering it's going
to use that backbone network
now i may have other networks
i might have the idea
that hey i have on premises
i have my on-premises network
and once again we have this idea that
hopefully they're not overlapping or
they can't be overlapping
so maybe on premises i'm using 10.10
16.
if i want to connect this ip space to
that of my virtual network there's
really two connectivity options
the first option is we actually go via
the internet we don't need any dedicated
cabling i just have a service provider
and what we can do is over the internet
we can do a site
to site
vpn
so this is going over
the internet
that's encrypted
but it is going over the internet
what i need up here
is
a vpn
gateway
that's what enables me to establish
because on premises i would also have
a vpn server that's going to establish
that connection it's going to create
that tunnel over the internet so now
connect these ip spaces together
now the latency could vary remember the
latency is the time things take because
there's a certain distance and on the
internet well there's different routers
and there's different routes it could go
so the amount of time it takes could
actually vary
there's two types of vpn gateways we can
actually have
the first one the one we don't really
want to use
is it could be policy based
now the problem with policy based is i
can only have really one connection
it's static and it's really very limited
in use it doesn't support point-to-site
vpn
this would only be used
if my on-premise was legacy and only
supported policy but really
we don't want to use policy we think of
that as this kind of this static type
what we want
is route based
we'll have a happy face
so the idea of route based is just as
the name suggests it supports different
routes based on the ip space i'm
connecting to
it does the encryption based on that ip
route so i can have multiple connections
from the gateway and it supports point
to site so point to site rather than
collecting an entire site it might be
hey i have just a particular machine
that over the internet i want to
establish a connection some developers
sitting at home i want to be part of
this virtual network so i can do that
with the route based i could not do it
with policies we really don't want to
use the policy
the route based also supports
coexistence with express route
now these can run active active so i can
actually have multiple vpn gateways
and it can be active passive or active
active
active active would be there's going to
be two public ip addresses so i can
actually run active active on prem as
well and have multiple tunnels
established so i have good resiliency
and faster failover if something
happened
the other option is
i don't want to go over the internet
if i think about azure azure actually
runs this huge backbone network this
microsoft
network
and this obviously extends into all of
the different regions
that microsoft has but it also extends
at certain points these into these
things called meet me's
or peering points
these are carrier neutral facilities so
what i can actually do
is i can have a dedicated private
connection this is not over the internet
it's a private connection
and what that enables me to then have
is
express route
now there are different models of
imagine i was actually not running my
own location
i was a co-location facility
they would just connect me from their
network
imagine i am my own facility and i need
a direct physical cable put in that
would be a layer 2 connection a
point-to-point ethernet connection
or maybe i currently have an mpls an
ipvpn
and any to any connection i could
connect to that to that meet me a layer
3 connection there are different models
that i can leverage but the key point
express route is private it is not going
over the internet
once i have express route there's
actually two modes of getting
communications
the first one and in this picture we
would care about the most is i should do
a new color we'll pick orange
we have something called private
peering
what private peering does is it
establishes through this connection
this sharing of routes now what it's
actually going to do
is i would have an express route gateway
so it would connect to there they would
exchange ip information using single bgp
and now this address space is connected
to this address space and even peered
networks if i want that there's an
option to use remote gateway and use
transit routing
i'm now connecting these using private
peering
there is another type called microsoft
peering imagine there's a whole bunch of
other services that don't live inside a
virtual network well i can make those
available over express route with the
idea of microsoft appearing
there's a huge number of these and
that's other things that don't live in
the v-net if we actually looked super
quickly
what we actually have is the idea of a
route filter so we would create this
route filter
and in that route filter we would
establish it with our express route
and we basically say
hey
what do i want to make available
over this connection so all of these
different services and they're region
based or they are just generic hey
everything
i say what i want to advertise
over
this microsoft peering
and then they would be accessed over
that express route connection so i can
be very specific
about hey what i want to make available
um with microsoft peering so that's now
offering other services
over that connection
so that's the other thing i can do i can
connect to multiple virtual networks for
the same express route circuit i create
the exact number depends on the type of
express route and the size of that
circuit
but it's basically giving me those
capabilities
now there are other concepts around
securing this there's network security
groups and user defined routes but we're
going to talk about that in later
lessons so i'm not going to talk about
that right now
um
there are two other quick concepts i do
want to cover though
i'm going to go over here there are lots
of resources that do not live inside a
virtual network
i could imagine the idea that maybe i
have a storage account
this is storage account one
and once again i have this idea that hey
i've got a certain subnet
well this subnet one
what i can do is i can add something
called a service endpoint so i can
enable service endpoint
for storage
what that now does is it adds a better
route
to storage in that particular region
and it now makes this subnet a known
entity
to storage accounts so that storage
account has a firewall i can think about
there's protection on
this storage accounts public facing
endpoint
so now because this becomes a known
entity i can say hey subnet one
if you're in subnet one
you're allowed to come through
and you can access the storage account
so this idea right here
these are service
endpoints
it gives me a better route
and it lets me on the firewall of the
service control
which subnets allowed to talk to it
another option
is maybe i don't want that public-facing
ip address at all now this could be the
same subnet i'm just drawing it
differently for the sake of the drawing
imagine i have it could be the same
storage account i'm going to draw a
second one and i'm joined storage
accounts this could be a database huge
thing support this
so normally these are all having a
public
facing ip
maybe i don't want that
so the other technology we can actually
leverage is something called a private
endpoint
and what a private endpoint as the name
suggests it actually creates it uses an
ip address from the subnet so let's say
this is private endpoint ip1
that
goes to a particular instance of a
service
so when i talk to this ip i'm talking to
this particular instance of a service
and if i do that i can actually now
completely disable the public ip i can
only talk to it
from
that public eye from that private
endpoint ip address
so we covered a lot networking there's a
huge amount of different functionality
around it
but the key point is a v-net lives
within a certain region within a certain
subscription
made up of one or more ipv4 spaces
optionally ipv6 i break it into subnets
both the region and subnet span
availability zones
i can connect v-nets to other v-nets
using peering i must make sure the ip
spaces are always unique be it to
another v-net or to on-premises
to external networks i could use a
site-to-site vpn that goes over the
internet and ideally want to use a
route-based
vpn because then i can connect to
multiple and with support things that
point to site
for private connectivity i can establish
an express route which is its own type
of gateway
with express route if i want to connect
to virtual networks i use private
peering
if i want to have services like these
actually advertised and accessed then i
can have a route filter define which
services and i use microsoft peering
so those are the core networking
concepts